# 5. Database Engine info
#### Why do we need database engines?
We need database engines for storage and access of data of the database.

#### Components of a database engine
The functional components of a database can be broadly divided into 3:
1. Storage manager - manages storing of database data in parts.
	- Important because database typically require a large amount of storage space - even upto Petabytes (i.e. 1024 Terabytes).
	- As the main memory is almost negligible as compared to the database size, data is stored on disk. Data are moved between main memory and disk as needed.
	- Since the movement of data between main memory and disc is slow, transfers need to be minimized.
2. Query processor - helps the database system to simplify and facilitate access to data.
	- It allows users to work at the view level with good performance while not being burdened by the low level details.
	- Its job is to translate queries and updates written in non-procedural language, at the physical level, into efficient sequence of operations at the physical level.
3. Transaction management component (not manager)
	- Allows application developers to treat a sequence of database accesses as if they were a single atomic access.
	- This permits thinking at a higher level of abstraction about the application without needing to be concerned with the lower-level details of managing the effects of concurrent access to data and of system failures.

- While database engines where traditionally centralized computer systems, today parallel processing is key for handling very large amounts of data efficiently.
- Modern database engines pay a lot of attention to parallel data storage and parallel query processing.

#### Component 1 - Storage manager
- The raw data are stored on the disk using the file system provided by the OS.
- The storage manager is responsible for interaction with the file system. This includes the translation of DML statements into low-level file-system commands. Thus, the storage manager is responsible for storing, retrieving and updating data in the database.
- Components of the storage manager:
	1. Authorization and integrity manager - which tests for the satisfaction of integrity constraints and checks the authority of users to access data.
	2. Transaction manager - ensures that the DB remains in a consistent (correct) state despite system failures, and that concurrent transactions proceed without conflicts.
	3. File manager - manages allocation of space on disk storage and the data structures used to represent information stored on disk.
	4. Buffer manager - responsible for fetching data from disk into main memory, and deciding what to cache in main memory. The buffer manager is a critical part of the database system, since it enables the database to handle data sizes that are much larger than the size of the main memory.
- The storage manager implements several data structures as part of the physical system implementation:
	1. Data files - which store the database itself.
	2. Data dictionary - stores metadata about the structure of the database, in particular the schema of the database.
	3. Indices - provides fast access to data items. Like the index of a textbook, a database index provides pointers to those data items that hold a particular value. For example - we could use an index to find the *instructor* record with a particular *ID*, or all *instructor* records with a particular *name*.

Storage media, file structures and buffer management are discussed ahead.

#### Component 2 - Query processor
Components include:
- DDL interpreter - interprets DDL statements and records the definitions in the data dictionary.
- DML compiler - translates DML statements in a query language into evaluation plan consisting of low-level instructions that the query-evaluation engine understands. A query can usually be translated into any of a number of alternative evaluation plans that give the same result. The DML compiler performs **query optimization**, i.e. it picks the lowest cost evaluation plan from among the alternatives.
- Query evaluation engine - executes low-level instructions generated by the DML compiler.

Query evaluation, and query optimization are discussed ahead.